setup guide (#83)
chalk-ai/docs: setup-guide.mdx

---
title: How Do I Chalk?
description: Customizing your Chalk solution.
---

---

## Introduction

Chalk is a feature store that enables data engineers and data scientists on production machine learning teams to
collaborate efficiently and effectively.

In this tutorial, we will guide you step by step through customizing your Chalk solution to help you achieve all of
your data goals.

---

## Creating your Chalk Project

> 1. If you don't already have a Github repository in which you will store your Chalk code, create one. Then, pick a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If you don't already have a Github repository where you will store your Chalk code, create one. Then, pick a
```

```bash
$ python3.10 -m venv .venv
$ source .venv/bin/activate
```
You can run `source .venv/bin/activate` to activate the virtual environment, and `deactivate` to deactivate.
5. Login by typing [`chalk login`](/cli/login). If you're using a dedicated environment, make sure you use the
[`--api-host`](/cli/chalk#api-host) flag. Type `y` when prompted and login in the browser.
6. Run [`chalk init`](/cli/init) to initialize your project files. This will initialize a directory structure with an
empty `src` directory and three files--`chalk.yaml`, `README.md`, and `requirements.txt`.
```
root_directory/
├── src/
├── chalk.yaml
├── README.md
└── requirements.txt
```
The first file, `chalk.yaml`, stores configuration information about your project. You can edit this so it
contains the following
   ```
   project: {YOUR_PROJECT_NAME}
   environments:
     default:
       requirements: requirements.txt
       runtime: python310
   ```

The second file, `README.md`, contains some basic commands you can use with the Chalk CLI.
The third file, `requirements.txt` should look something like this:
   ```
    requests
    chalkpy[runtime]
    ```

   This contains your project dependencies.

>    You can add a file `.chalkignore` which will act just like a `.gitignore` file.

Reviewer: mention that it excludes from chalk apply?

7. Within your virtual environment, install the project requirements.
```bash Terminal
$ pip3 install -r requirements.txt
```

Now, you should have a virtual environment with all project dependencies installed and a basic project structure upon
which we will build in the next step.

## Configure Datasources

> Having set up a basic project directory, we want to configure the data sources from which we will load data to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having set up a basic project directory, next we'll want to configure the data sources from which we will load data to
```

compute our features. We can do so in the Chalk dashboard.

1. In the same directory from before, login or signup with Chalk directly from the command line. The
[`chalk login`](https://docs.chalk.ai/cli/login) command will open your browser and create an
API token for your local development, as well as redirect you to your dashboard. If you are not
redirected you can also find the dashboard at [https://chalk.ai/projects](https://chalk.ai/projects).

> You will automatically see all of the environments in which the email you used to login has been

Reviewer: you can also do `chalk dashboard`

Author: TIL

provisioned as a user.
 2. Within the dashboard, navigate to `Data Sources` in the side bar and add all data sources that you will

> be working with here. After you have saved a data source, you can also use the `Test Data Source` button

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be working with here. After you have saved a data source, you can use the `Test Data Source` button
```

in the upper right hand corner of the Data Source configuration view to verify that your connection is
valid.
 3. Within the working directory, we'll add a `datasources.py` file under our `src` folder to reference the
data sources that we've added in the dashboard.
 ```
 root_directory/
 ├── src/
 │  ├── __init__.py
 │  └── datasources.py
 ├── chalk.yaml
 ├── README.md
 └── requirements.txt
 ```

Say we added a PostgreSQL data source, then our `datasources.py` might look something like this:
```python
pg = PostgreSQLSource(name='PG')
```

> For more details on setting up data sources, [see here.](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/integrations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details on setting up data sources, [see here](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/integrations).
```

> ##  Define Feature Sets and Resolvers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
---

##  Define Feature Sets and Resolvers
```

> Having set up our data sources, we now want to define the registry for this feature store by writing our

Reviewer: maybe not repeat the same intro as the previous step? also, i dont think the concept of registry is user facing aka they wont know what this means

> feature sets and resolvers. Each *feature set* is a Python class of features, and a *resolver* tells Chalk

Reviewer: ```suggestion
feature sets and resolvers. Each *feature set* is a Python class of features, and each *resolver* tells Chalk
```

how to compute the values for different features. Each feature that we write should correspond to a resolver output.

We recommend starting with a minimal feature set and building up iteratively to easily test your code along the way.
After writing some feature sets, resolvers, and tests, we would expect to see a directory structure like this:
```
root_directory/
├── src/
│  ├── resolvers/
│  │  ├── .../
│  │  ├── __init__.py
│  │  └── pipelines.py
│  ├── __init__.py
│  ├── datasources.py
│  └── feature_sets.py
├── tests/
│  └── ...
├── .chalkignore
├── chalk.yaml
├── README.md
└── requirements.txt
```

You can read more in our docs about the [different kinds of features](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/features) and the
[different kinds of resolvers](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/resolver-overview) that you can write. If you would like

> guidance on how to structure your featuresets and resolvers, please reach out in your support channel!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
guidance on how to structure your feature sets and resolvers, please reach out in your support channel!
```

> ## Deploy and Query

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
---

## Deploy and Query
```

> Having defined features and resolvers, the next step is to deploy your pipelines. You can deploy to production by

Reviewer: same as above, easy to gloss over sentences if they have the same structure as something you've already read

Author: facts

using the [`chalk apply`](https://docs.chalk.ai/cli/apply) command. During development, we recommend that you use
`chalk apply --branch {BRANCH_NAME}` to deploy to the [branch server](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/branches), which allows
multiple people to work concurrently in one environment, and also enables more performant deploys.

Once you have deployed your code, then you can query your features directly from the command line using the
[`chalk query`](https://docs.chalk.ai/cli/query) command or from within a notebook using the

> [ChalkClient](https://docs.chalk.ai/api-docs#ChalkClient) to run `ChalkClient.query()` or `ChalkClient.offline_query()`.

Reviewer: maybe mention our other clients (go, java etc)?

Author: ok true

This is the primary workflow for iterating on features and resolvers! Write, deploy, and query to verify whether the

> feature values that you receive are the expected values. Once you have finalized your feature set and resolver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
feature values that you receive are the values you expect. Once you have finalized your feature set and resolver
```

> definitions, then the final step is frequently orchestration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
definitions, the final step is frequently orchestration.
```

> ## Orchestration

Reviewer 2: above the double headers, the convention has been to insert a line break

```suggestion
---

## Orchestration
```

> Once you have verified that your feature and resolver definitions are correct, then the next step is to determine how

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have verified that your feature and resolver definitions are correct, the next step is to determine how
```

you want to use the corresponding feature values within your larger machine learning platform. Some users [trigger
resolvers](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/runs) and run queries from within other orchestrated pipelines, such as Airflow.
Some users define [cron schedules](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/resolver-cron)for their resolvers,
and [set staleness values](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/feature-caching) on different features to
ensure that the data they query falls within their requirements for freshness. The data world is your oyster!

> But, as always, if you would like guidance on how to configure that oyster, please reach out in your support channel! 

Reviewer: lol
